# Reflections on Belizean History
*Last updated 30.11.2025*

* From August 1993 through June 1997, I attended St. John's College in Belize City, founded in 1887 and the third oldest secondary school in Belize. I took history classes throughout my four years there, and I was usually one of the top students, as evidenced by the honors certificates I have kept. And while I got a very good education in Belizean and West Indian history, and while my teachers were some of the best in the country, we were taught Belizean history in particular in a very disconnected sense. For instance, we learned about the colonial settlement in the 1600s from before Belize was even called British Honduras, but we were not taught that we were descended from the the people participating in that history.
* In August 2014, I visited the national archives (formally, the Belize Archives and Records Service) in Belmopan for the first time. It wasn't until my visit there that I was able to connect my own existence with the existence of the Belizeans whose actions reverberated through our history. For instance, I learned that through my Cherrington line I am descended from one of the ['Flowers Bank Fourteen'](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W56NZIToHsM) whose votes in 1797 eventually led to the settlers deciding to fight Spanish invasion in September of 1798. I would certainly have appreciated been cognizant of that while I was a teenager and not until I was nearing my mid-30s, as it would have given me a very different appreciation of Belizean history.
* That is, I think many Belizeans view our country's history with a kind of sterile appreciation for those who came before us, rather than that we carry the blood of the people who made our country what it is. We carry their DNA, and they live on in us.
* Also in 2014, by way of an auspicious circumstance, I also came upon some interesting [otherwise privileged] demographic data for contemporary Belize. What that data showed was that a significant proportion of Belizeans carried the last name Flowers, and were therefore also likely linked to the handful of siblings who originally established Flowers Bank following the arrival of people from Britain's former Mosquito Shore colony on the coasts of Honduras and Nicaragua.
