# Belizean History: Through the Lens of Genealogy

# About
*Last updated: 5 January 2026*

# Dedication
*To Judy: May you take as much pride in your ancestors as I have. We are, after all, the results of our their hopes for us, their lives, and their sacrifices.*

## Objectives
* Provide insights into the histories of Belize's Cherrington and Leacock-Heusner families
* Document those findings for the benefit of members of those families, and for Belizeans in general

## Chronology

* **Circa 1989**: As a child, my parents and I would visit my mother's aunt **Ivy Perera (nee Leacock)** in Belmopan (Belize's capital) on Easter weekend of every year. Other family members would also visit. I must have been eight or nine (so likely late March 1989 or mid-April 1990) when one Easter Sunday night, the discussion of the evening focused on the family history of my mother's side of the family. I recall the discussion focusing on how we were a mix of [Creole (*Kriol*)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Belizean_Creole_people), German, British, Spanish, and [Amerindian](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indigenous_peoples_of_the_Americas) ([Maya](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maya_peoples)). I was fascinated because even though by that time I'd learned in my Social Studies classes at [Saint Joseph's](https://stjosephbz.weebly.com/) that Creole was a melange of African and British, what the discussions of our family's history indicated was that my family was even more mixed than perhaps the *average* Belizean family, particularly a Creole Belizean family.
* **Circa 1994**: A few years after the discussion of family history at Aunt Ivy's house in Belmopan, I saw the [second episode](https://highlander.fandom.com/wiki/Family_Tree) of the *Highlander* TV show about an immortal man from Scotland. In the episode, the eponymous Highlander, Duncan MacLeod, has a flashback to just after he revives from death for the first time. He recalls running after his adoptive father, who is seen riding away on horseback, as he screams, "*Where do I come from?! Where do I come from?!*" That scene likewise made an impression on me. "Where do I come from?" is a question I have ultimately been obsessed with for over three decades.
* **Circa 1994**: I had to make some sort of rudimentary family tree for my second year *Belizean History* class at the prestigious [St. John's College (SJC)](https://www.sjc.edu.bz/) in Belize City. Mrs. [Ignacia Herlinda Arana](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4Rw8iJ7HcZg) - known to us as Agnes Arana - was the instructor for the class.
    * My father (**Glenn Cherrington**) was able to provide some limited details on his side of the family.
    * His mother **Amyline Cherrington (nee Young)** had passed away in November 1991 and he had said that she was the keeper of knowledge of the Young and Cherrington sides of my father's family. My father said that Amy's mother, **Fernanda Ortega**, had been born in the Peten in neighboring Guatemala, and that Amy's father, **John Young**, was a tall "red skinned" (i.e., lightskinned) Creole man.
    * My father and his siblings affirmed that their father **Herman Cherrington**'s mother, **Eusebia Zelaya**, had spoken Spanish and was Hispanic. My grandfather - who could not recall the names of *his* grandparents - affirmed that his Cherrington grandfather had been "a white man," but I would later discover that this could not have been true, although his grandfather's *grandfather*, **William Taylor Cherrington**, was indeed a Caucasian man from England. Herman Cherrington's father, **Josiah Cherrington**, had been born in the village of [Mullins River](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mullins_River) in Stann Creek, as had Herman himself, and Herman's siblings.
    * For what it's worth, and with all due credit to Mrs. Arana, I wish that in 1994 that my classmates and I had been taught in our *Belizean History* class that history wasn't merely *performed* by random outsiders we were connected to. I wish that we had been taught that for many of us, our ancestors - having inhabited Belize's territory for at least centuries - had played key parts of that history. For instance, while we had learned about 1798's [Battle of Saint George's Caye](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battle_of_St._George%27s_Caye) from primary school days, I did not learn until about 2014 or 2017 that I was *directly* descended from one of the [Flowers Bank Fourteen](https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop&v=W56NZIToHsM), whose key vote in June 1797 later led to the September 1798 standoff that defined the future of Belize.
* **Circa 1995**: While attending high school at SJC (Aug. 1993 - May 1997), I would spend every Friday evening visiting my maternal grandmother, **Rita Leacock (nee Encalada)** at her home on Vernon Street in Belize City. We would speak about her family, and I would ask her about her memories of her own grandparents and great grandparents, where applicable. One evening, she was visited by a nun, **Sister Louise**, who was a distant relative and who was trying to construct a family tree and to document who our ancestors were. I don't recall what came of the effort, but I recall my grandmother commenting that some gentleman named **Busman Arnold** who lived somewhere in central Belize was a relative of ours and of Sister Louise and that the nun had visited him to learn family lore.
  * Throughout the time that I regularly visit my grandmother on Friday evenings, we will talk about family history. For instance, my grandmother fondly recalls his maternal grandfather, **David Emmanuel Bood**, a Belize City-based barber and "a jolly old soul" who had spent part of his youth with the Cabral family down at Hunting Caye in the Sapodilla Cayes range in Belize's southernmost waters in the Gulf of Honduras. Compared to **Rita Leacock**'s other grandchildren (and she will have thirteen in total), I think I am the one who most connect with her regarding family history. While she does not say it in so many words, she communicates to me that **we owe a debt of gratitude to our ancestors. One way to repay that debt is to remember those ancestors and to pass on the stories of their lives.**
* **Circa 1998**: In my mother's collection of books (she had left my father and emigrated to the US in late 1991), I found a copy of the *Belizean Studies* academic journal that SJC used to publish in the late 1970s and early 1980s. The specific copy I found was a reproduction of the [earliest censuses of British Honduras](https://drive.google.com/file/d/0B_eQWO64TxDbTVBCd094VG9FZ3M/view?usp=sharing&resourcekey=0-Mg0-elb4ZFJxKpuDLNjZyw) (the earlier name for Belize), specifically the censuses of 1816, 1820, and 1823. In the 1816 census lists a **William T. Cherrington**, whom I assume to be an ancestor, an assumption that I will eventually confirm over a decade and a half later. **William T. Cherrington** is documented as being a "White Male."
* **Late 1999**: I am in my first semester at [Loyola College in Maryland](https://www.loyola.edu/) (which has since been renamed Loyola University Maryland). I am a junior Biology major, and in May 2001, I will graduate *Summa Cum Laude* with a Bachelor of Science degree, but in ~December 1999, I am selecting classes for the second semester of my junior year. I select a *Molecular Genetics* course with Prof. Neena Din, because of my interest in inheritance. Years later, I will come to understand that had Loyola offered a *Human Population Genetics* course, the course of my professional life would likely have been very different. I take Prof. Din's course between January and May 2000, and I come out of it with an A grade. At the end of that spring semester, Prof. Din offers for me to shadow two of the students working in her lab, who are doing genetic analyses using the PCR technique, but I am not really interested in molecular genetics. In my final two semesters at Loyola (Fall 2000 through Spring 2001), I will end up doing undergraduate level research with a different professor, plant ecologist [Dr. Bernadette Roche](https://www.loyola.edu/academics/biology/faculty/roche-bernadette.html).
* **Late 2003**: In my second year of graduate studies at the University of Washington - where I am pursuing a Master of Science degree in forest resources - I see the mini-series *Children of Dune* on the SciFi Channel. Following that, I am intrigued as to what happens next in Frank Herbert's *Dune* Saga, so I purchase a copy of *God Emperor of Dune* from the UW's University Bookstore. Something from the novel that clicks with me is that Leto Atreides (the long-lived God Emperor) has the capacity to project himself into the past and relive the experiences of his ancestors. The concept of *genetic memory* has been explored previously in the saga, but I am intrigued.
* **Early to mid 2004**: I am writing to a classmate of mine who is of Indian descent and whom I suspect may also have some Arabic ancestry. I tell her in my email that I have essentially "looked into my blood" (using the parlance of *Dune*) and seen that centuries back, I too have some Arabic ancestry. I must have been on to something, because even without having any concrete oral traditions to back up my assertion, a decade later, a genetic test will indicate that I and other members of my family carry traces of North African and / or Arabic ancestry. In more recent times, I will wonder, was part of my fascination due to romanticized concepts of the Orient, drawn from watching TV shows in the 1980s?
* **February 2014**: I submitted a saliva sample to the company [23andMe](https://www.23andme.com/), and that rekindled my interest in genetics. I was somehow able to convince my mother, two of her sisters, two of my maternal cousins, my mother's paternal aunt, and my father to submit samples [as well as my wife and multiple members of her family].
   * The 23andMe results eventually confirm what is already known in my mother's family - that my maternal grandfather **Ramsay Gordon Leacock, Sr.** is not the son of **Ivan Leacock**, but that he is in fact the son of **Dr. Karl Stanislaus Heusner**. This has been something of a sore point in our family because even though the late Dr. Heusner - the first Belizean to become a medical doctor, and the namesake of Belize's largest hospital - acknowledged my grandfather and his two sisters (Ishbel and Ivy), a few family members dispute that my grandfather was a Heusner. The 23andMe results essentially put the matter to rest.
   * The 23andMe results also help to address a family mystery, namely the parentage of my grandfather's mother (**Avis Viola Leacock, nee Peters**). Avis' father was not known, and there were two contrary accounts of who her father might have been. My grandfather's cousin Ruth Stewart had indicated that Avis' father was a [bootlegger](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rum-running) named John (surname unknown) who had died trying to outrun authorities chasing his boat. My grandmother recounted that Avis' father might have been her mother's half-brother. What 23andMe indicated, however, was that unlike the scores of other Belizeans in 23andMe's database, my maternal grandfather's kin all had relatives from [Cape Verde (Cabo Verde)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cape_Verde). Some sleuthing revealed that one [**Pedro Eustaquio Pereira Fontes**](https://ancestors.familysearch.org/en/GFW8-GF3/pedro-eustaquio-pereira-fontes-1864-1946) from Cape Verde had moved to British Honduras in the early 1900s, married a local woman and had a handful of children with her before emigrating to Hawaii. The fact that I, my mother, her sisters, and her aunt (my grandfather's sister) are also related to the descendants of Pedro Pereira points to a likely candidate for Avis' father - Pedro Pereira himself, as my great grandmother was born in Belize in the period of time that Mr. Pereira resided in Belize. Somehow, Mr. Pereira and Avis' mother - **Mabel Peters** - must have had some daliance, and my great grandmother was the result. I even have a spreadsheet documenting calculations used to support that assessment ("dna_comparisons_cape_verde_jan2016.xlsx").
   * If anything, the 23andMe results - eventually followed by comparative results from Ancestry DNA and Family Tree DNA - allowed me to get a quantitative *estimate* of my ethnic composition. I had actually already derived my own estimate based on family histories, but 23andMe provided me with an estimate that was obviously closer to reality, acknowledging that what such genetic tests are doing is sampling markers (specifically, single nucleotide polymorphisms or SNPs) across one's genome, and then generating estimates based on comparisons to ever shifting reference populations.
   * My first set of 23andMe results in 2014 - since updated - said that my DNA was ~50% Sub-Saharan African, 36% European, and 12% Native American, meaning that of eight theoretical great grandparents, four would have been Sub Saharan African, three European, and one Indigenous American.
   * The 23andMe results also confirmed my direct patrilineal descent from a European male, eventually revealed to be **William Taylor Cherrington** of Staffordshire, England.
   * The 23andMe results also indicated that both my mother and my father have essentially the same mitochondrial DNA haplogroup (L3b), likely of West African origin.
* **March 2014**: Via 23andMe, I am contacted by a distant relative, **Akeem Genus**, who has been implementing a "Belize Ancestry Project" as a pet side project. I am impressed by Akeem's dedication to learn more about the genetic ethnic makeup of Belizeans. He documents this information in his spare time, despite having a day job and other commitments. By coincidence, Akeem is the nephew of **Allen Genus**, who had been one of my internship supervisors at the Toledo Institute for Development and Environment (TIDE) when I was a graduate student intern in the summer of 2003. Allen Genus had been TIDE's Operations Director. It was fascinating to consider that I had been working with a relative and I was unaware of the fact. That said, to this day (Jan. 2026), I still have not yet discovered how specifically I am related to Akeem Genus, but that will be a common thread with the vast majority of the relatives I discover through 23andMe, Ancestry DNA, and Family Tree DNA.
   * Akeem also inquires about possible [Garifuna](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garifuna) ancestry on my part. I have grown up identifying as Creole, and the Creole and Garifuna have had cultural frictions, so I initially doubted that my family would also have Garifuna ancestry. However, Akeem points out that I have a number of distant relatives on 23andMe who are Garifuna and unlikely to have had Creole ancestors. Visits to Belize's national archives (beginning in 2014 and onwards) will reveal the likely source of that Garifuna ancestry.
* **June 2014**: Partly as a result of having been fascinated by my 23andMe results, for a ~three month spell, I was convinced that my direct paternal ancestor William T. Cherrington wanted me to uncover his story.
* **August 2014**: The week before my father (**Glenn Alvin Cherrington**) passed away, I was on a work trip to Belmopan (specifically, a consultancy with the University of Belize's Environmental Research Institute), I had a free morning and I visited the [Belize Archives and Records Service (BARS)](https://archives.gov.bz/). Two of the archivists there, Mary Alpuche and Yobani Aguilar, were *extremely* helpful, and facilitated access to a number of records that helped fill in gaps in my Cherrington family history in particular. I was able to hold in my hands the [last will and testament of **William T. Cherrington**](https://github.com/BzGEO/popn_genetics/blob/main/bz/cherrington/wm_cherrington_will_1830.md), from 1830. I thought about the almost two hundred years that had passed and all of the knowledge of our family that had essentially been lost, because that knowledge had *not* been handed down.
* **August 2014**: The Sunday I returned to France from Belize, my copies of the three Parish Registers of British Honduras (compiled by Sonia Bennett Murray) arrived. These documents added information to what I'd been able to discover during my first trip to Belize's national archives.
* **September 2014**: By the end of the previous month, mirroring the work of Akeem Genus, I had created a small database of 102 Belizeans / descendants of Belizeans who had submitted samples to 23andMe. I and members of my family were related to 45.1% of the 94 Belizeans who were not close family members. Also, we had no idea how we were related to most of those Belizeans. It was interesting to find out that we were related to a member of Belize's prominent Hyde family, the implication being that we *might* be distant cousins to the larger **Hyde-Lindo family**.
* **December 2014**: As a tribute to my late father, by the end of 2014, I had created a family tree of the Belizean Cherrington family using the information I had gathered from different sources, though mainly from Belize's archives and from information shared with me by one of my grandfather's kinsmen, **Ronald Cherrington** of Florida. Around the same time, I put together a *pedigree chart* and see that I am missing a lot of information on my ancestors.
* **June 2017**: I read the book [*They Came to Belize: 1750-1810*](https://www.amazon.com/They-Came-Belize-1750-1810-Compiled/dp/0806358408) by Sonia Bennett Murray, which among other things provided additional insights into my Flowers ancestors. The Flowers were a group of ensalved siblings owned by a Captain Flowers in what is now Nicaragua, and who had escaped to freedom into the wilderness and come to Belize when Britain's Mosquito Shore possessions were evacuated in 1787.
* **May 2022**: I read the book [*Origin: A Genetic History of the Americas*](https://www.amazon.com/Audible-Origin-Genetic-History-Americas/dp/B09KFC9DWG) by Prof. Jennifer Raff. It was an interesting read, and it even referenced a few Maya genetic profiles from Belize, but [IMHO] it lacked a comprehensive timeline of what the various findings implied.
* **January 2024**: I receive the copy I have ordered of *The Garifuna: A Nation Across Borders*, edited by Dr. Joseph Palacio in 2005. Not only does it make a nice addition to my growing library of literature on Belize, but I quickly notice that the Garifuna have a strong oral tradition and a focus on family history. It is also extremely fascinating to learn that they practice spirit possession by ancestors in their *dugu* ritual, and that members of their community will ask said ancestors questions about the past during the ritual. To me, that seems parallel to the concept of *genetic memory*, as another mechanism by which family histories can be accessed. One of the stories documented is that of a woman who has carried a tale from a female ancestor who said that she was the daughter of the Garifuna *paramount chief* on Saint Vincent, [Joseph Chatoyer (Satuye)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joseph_Chatoyer). In March 2024, my friend **Marion Cayetano** - who was one of the book's editors and contributors - signs the book for me. I often wonder if the kinship I have felt for Marion may be based on our potentially being distant cousins.
* **11 September 2025**: On a work trip to Belize, I took my University of Alabama in Huntsville (UAH) supervisor to my Aunt Carolyn's house for dinner. She commented to my supervisor that I was our family's "keeper of the knowledge" and he laughed, as if this was some formal role.
* **5 January 2026**: I have begun this GitHub page as a way to document the various things I have learned about my own family history over the years. **I hope that this survives in some form and that my own descendants [or perhaps other relatives] will find this useful.** I wonder about the stories of the people who came before me, whose genetic contributions gave rise to the physical body that I have.
    * I particularly wonder about the Creole ancestors I had, who likely inhabited parts of the Belize River Valley, and what their lives were like, and what traditions and beliefs they held, in the 200+ years of inhabiting a specific corner of Central America.
    * One reason that the [concept of the] stories of my ancestors' lives fascinate me is that a tiny portion of my 2025 Christmas vacation has been spent listening to family stories told by my mother-in-law. I realize that a wealth of stories can be told about just a handful of individuals from one or two generations. My mother-in-law's recollections center on lives lived in the Departments of Jutiapa and Jalapa in southeastern Guatemala. Those tales focus on large families, occupations, achievements, inheritances, and marriage customs, among other things. Since those are not *my* stories to tell, I only provide a summary here.
    * I feel like I have been assembling puzzle pieces for a very long time, and I also have the sneaking suspicion that I will never fully complete the puzzle in my lifetime. I wonder if scientific advances - particularly in the area of *data science* - may help figure out who some of my unknown ancestors are.
* **6 January 2026**: I have seriously delved into genealogy for the better part of twelve years. While I have made interesting discoveries almost every month, hitherto now, most of those discoveries have remained locked in my mind, but through this effort, I seek to document the things I have found over the past decade. Tidbits include:
  
   * Insights into the ancestry of the extended Heusner family
   * Hidden parentage of **Avis Leacock** and a linkage with the Cape Verde islands
   * Confirmation of the lore regarding the Mexican Caste War and **Mabel Peters**
   * Discovery of Cherrington family linkages with the Belize River Valley, including my own "double-cousin" status with **June Heusner** and **Rose Smith**
   * Discovery of the linkages of the Cherrington and Flowers families
   * Discovery of Garifuna ancestry in the Cherrington family
   * Discovery of linkages with the Hyde-Lindo family
   * Discovery of linkages with various former classmates (J. Neal, R. Polonio, C. Rogers, A. Rowland)

# References / Additional Reading

* [A History of Belize: Nation in the Making](https://www.amazon.com/history-Belize-Nation-making-Explorer/dp/976814209X)
* [Becoming Belize: A History of an Outpost of Empire Searching for Identity, 1528-1823](https://www.amazon.com/dp/9766402469)
* [The First Parish Register of Belize, 1794-1810, and the First Four Censuses, 1816-1826](https://www.amazon.com/Parish-Register-1794-1810-Censuses-1816-1826/dp/0806354828)
* [Second Parish Registers of Belize, 1813-1827](https://www.amazon.com/Second-Parish-Registers-1813-1827-Newspaper/dp/0806355263)
* [Third Parish Registers of Belize, 1828-1841](https://www.amazon.com/Registers-1828-1841-Yarborough-Newspapers-Advertiser/dp/0806355808)
* [They Came to Belize, 1750-1810](https://www.amazon.com/They-Came-Belize-1750-1810-Compiled/dp/0806358408)
* [The Life, Times, and Legacy of Dr. Karl Stanislaus Heusner](https://books.google.com.gt/books/about/The_Life_Times_Legacy_of_Dr_Karl_Stanisl.html?id=mHE7ngAACAAJ&redir_esc=y)
* [English-Kriol Dictionary](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1321cAttST-amTWwIyDGVyOc__oeN8gnb/view)
* [The Garifuna, A Nation across Borders: Essays in Social Anthropology](https://www.amazon.com/Garifuna-nation-across-borders-Anthropology/dp/9768161132)
* [Origin: A Genetic History of the Americas](https://www.amazon.com/Audible-Origin-Genetic-History-Americas/dp/B09KFC9DWG)
* [Ancient Maya Cities of the Eastern Lowlands](https://www.amazon.com/Ancient-Cities-Eastern-Lowlands-World-ebook/dp/B01M24GL7Y)
* [Warlords and maize men: A guide to the Maya sites of Belize](https://www.amazon.com/Warlords-maize-men-guide-Belize/dp/9686233067)
